Kubernetes - Architecture

Kubernetes comes with a client-server architecture. It consists of master and worker nodes, 
with the master being installed on a single Linux system and the nodes on many Linux workstations. 
The master node, contains the components such as API Server, controller manager, scheduler, and etcd database for stage storage.
kubelet to communicate with the master, the kube-proxy for networking, and a container runtime such as Docker to manage containers.

Kubernetes Components
Kubernetes is composed of a number of components, each of which plays a specific role in the overall system. 
These components can be divided into two categories:

nodes: Each Kubernetes cluster requires at least one worker node, which is a collection of worker machines that make up the nodes where our container will be deployed.
Control plane: The worker nodes and any pods contained within them will be under the control plane. 

1️⃣ Master Node (Control Plane Node)
Responsible for managing the cluster, not running user applications.
It contains services like:

1)API Server (cluster entry point)
2)Scheduler (decides where Pods run)
3)Controller Manager
4)etcd (cluster database)

Purpose: Controls the cluster.

1️⃣ API Server

The main entry point for all Kubernetes commands (kubectl)
All communication happens via API Server
Interview line:
“API Server is the front door of Kubernetes.”


2️⃣ Scheduler

Decides which node will run which pod
Checks CPU, RAM, taints, tolerations, affinities
Interview line:
“Scheduler places pods on the best-suited worker node.”


3️⃣ Controller Manager

Ensures the desired state = actual state
Includes many controllers:
Node Controller
Deployment Controller
ReplicaSet Controller
Endpoint Controller

Example:
If you want 3 pods but 1 dies → Controller Manager starts a new one.


4️⃣ etcd (Database)

A distributed key-value store
Stores entire cluster state
Highly available, strongly consistent

Interview line:
“etcd is the source of truth of Kubernetes.”


🧩 Main Components of a Worker Node:

2️⃣ Worker Node
A Worker Node is the machine where Kubernetes actually runs your containers. 
It contains Kubelet, Kube-Proxy, and Container Runtime, and it executes the workloads assigned by the Master Node.

This is where your applications run inside Pods.

1)Components inside a worker node:
2)kubelet – communicates with the master
3)kube-proxy – manages networking
4)container runtime (Docker, containerd, CRI-O)

Purpose: Runs your application workloads.


1️⃣ Kubelet
A small agent that runs on every worker node.
Communicates with Control Plane.
Makes sure containers inside Pods are running.
If a container crashes → kubelet restarts it.


2️⃣ Kube-Proxy
Handles networking on the node.
assign IP top each pod.(dynamic ip)
Implements service load-balancing and routing.
Ensures Pods can communicate with each other and outside world.


3️⃣ Container Runtime
Runs containers.
Examples:
Docker
containerd
CRI-O
Pulls images, starts/stops containers.


Pod:
1)smallest unit in kubernetes.
2)Pod is a group of one or more conatiners that are deployed together on the same host.
3)A cluster is a group of nodes.
4)A cluster has altest one worker node and master node.
5)Pod runs on node, which is control by master.


🚀 What is a Multi-Container Pod?

A Multi-Container Pod is a Pod that contains more than one container running together inside the same Kubernetes Pod.
➡️ All containers inside the Pod share:
Same Network (IP, Port space)
Same Storage (Volumes)
Same Lifecycle
Same Node
It is used when containers must work together closely.


✅ 1. What is kubectl?
kubectl = Kubernetes Command Line Tool
It is used to interact with your Kubernetes cluster.
With kubectl you can:
Deploy applications
Check pods, deployments, services
Scale your app
Delete resources
View logs

Example commands:
kubectl get pods
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
kubectl describe pod my-pod
kubectl logs my-pod


➡️ kubectl does not create a cluster.
It only controls an existing Kubernetes cluster.


✅ 2. What is Minikube?

Minikube = Local Kubernetes Cluster for learning & testing
It runs a small Kubernetes cluster on your laptop/PC.
Good for developers, practice, learning.
Not used in production.

minikube start
minikube status
minikube dashboard


✅ 3. What is kind? (Kubernetes in Docker)
kind = Kubernetes cluster using Docker containers
Creates a Kubernetes cluster inside Docker containers.
Very lightweight.
Faster than Minikube.

Used for:
Local testing
CI/CD pipelines
Learning Kubernetes

kind create cluster
kind get clusters
kind delete cluster
